
   Getting the source via CVS
   
   If you would like to keep up with the current sources on a regular
   basis, you can fetch them from our CVS server and then use CVS to
   retrieve updates from time to time.
   
   To do this you first need a local copy of CVS (Concurrent Version
   Control System), which you can get from http://www.cyclic.com/ or any
   GNU software archive site. Currently we recommend version 1.9.
   
   Once you have installed the CVS software, do this:
cvs -d :pserver:anoncvs@postgresql.org:/usr/local/cvsroot login

   You will be prompted for a password; enter 'postgresql'. You should
   only need to do this once, since the password will be saved in
   .cvspass in your home directory.
   
   Having logged in, you are ready to fetch the PostgreSQL sources. Do
   this:
cvs -z3 -d :pserver:anoncvs@postgresql.org:/usr/local/cvsroot co -P pgsql

   which will install the PostgreSQL sources into a subdirectory pgsql of
   the directory you are currently in.
   
   (If you have a fast link to the Internet, you may not need -z3, which
   instructs CVS to use gzip compression for transferred data. But on a
   modem-speed link, it's a very substantial win.)
   
   This initial checkout is a little slower than simply downloading a
   tar.gz file; expect it to take 40 minutes or so if you have a 28.8K
   modem. The advantage of CVS doesn't show up until you want to update
   the file set later on.
   
   Whenever you want to update to the latest CVS sources, cd into the
   pgsql subdirectory, and issue
cvs -z3 update -d -P

   This will fetch only the changes since the last time you updated. You
   can update in just a couple of minutes, typically, even over a
   modem-speed line.
   
   You can save yourself some typing by making a file .cvsrc in your home
   directory that contains
cvs -z3
update -d -P

   This supplies the -z3 option to all cvs commands, and the -d and -P
   options to cvs update. Then you just have to say
cvs update

   to update your files.
   
   CAUTION: some versions of CVS have a bug that causes all checked-out
   files to be stored world-writable in your directory. If you see that
   this has happened, you can do something like
chmod -R go-w pgsql

   to set the permissions properly. This bug is allegedly fixed in the
   latest beta version of CVS, 1.9.28 ... but it may have other, less
   predictable bugs.
   
   CVS can do a lot of other things, such as fetching prior revisions of
   the PostgreSQL sources rather than the latest development version. For
   more info consult the manual that comes with CVS, or see the online
   documentation at http://www.cyclic.com/.
